[KIP-71] Dynamic gas fee pricing mechanism (#72)
klaytn/kips: KIPs/kip-71.md

---
kip: 71

> title: Dynamic gas fee pricing mechanism

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Dynamic Gas Fee Pricing Mechanism
```

> author: Woojin Lee (jared) <jared.fi@krustuniverse.com>, Junghyun Colin Kim <colin.kim@groundx.xyz>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
author: Woojin Lee (jared) <jared.fi@krustuniverse.com>, Junghyun Colin Kim <colin.klaytn@krustuniverse.com>
```

discussions-to: https://forum.klaytn.com/t/en-new-transaction-fee-mechanism-dynamic-gas-price-proposal/4844 
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2022-04-14
---

<!--You can leave these HTML comments in your merged KIP and delete the visible duplicate text guides, they will not appear and may be helpful to refer to if you edit it again. This is the suggested template for new KIPs. Note that a KIP number will be assigned by an editor. When opening a pull request to submit your KIP, please use an abbreviated title in the filename, `kip-draft_title_abbrev.md`. The title should be 44 characters or less.-->

## Simple Summary
<!--"If you can't explain it simply, you don't understand it well enough." Provide a simplified and layman-accessible explanation of the KIP.-->
A dynamic gas fee pricing mechanism based on network usage, that includes fixed-per-block network fee that is partially burned.

## Abstract
<!--A short (~200 word) description of the technical issue being addressed.-->

> There is a base fee per gas in protocol, which can move up or down each block according to a formula which is a function of gas used in parent block and gas target. The algorithm results in the base fee per gas increasing when blocks are above the gas target, and decreasing when blocks are below the gas target. It repeats until base fee reachs lower bound fee or upper bound fee. The base fee per gas is partially burned. Transactions specify the maximum fee per gas they are willing to pay total. The transaction will always pay the base fee per gas of the block it was included in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is a base fee per gas in protocol, which can move up or down for each block according to a formula which is a function of the gas used in the parent block and the gas target. The algorithm results in the base fee per gas increasing when the gas used in the previous block is above the gas target, and decreasing when the gas used in the previous block is below the gas target. It repeats until base fee reaches the lower bound fee or the upper bound fee. The base fee per gas is partially burned. Transactions specify the maximum fee per gas they are willing to pay in total. The transaction will always pay the base fee per gas of the block it was included in.
```

 

## Motivation
<!--The motivation is critical for KIPs that want to change the Klaytn protocol. It should clearly explain why the existing protocol specification is inadequate to address the problem that the KIP solves. KIP submissions without sufficient motivation may be rejected outright.-->

> Klaytn has been following a policy of “fixed gas price“, with the gas price fixed at a certain level (e.g. 25 ston, 750 ston). This approach was adopted in the initial phase because it allows users to easily send transactions easily without having to enter the gas fee, while minimizing the volatility of transaction fees. But in the periods leading up to the gas price increase, we have seen a lot of transactions on Klaytn as well as the following problems:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Klaytn has been following a policy of “fixed gas price“, with the gas price fixed at a certain level (e.g. 25 ston and 750 ston). This approach was adopted in the initial phase because it allows users to easily send transactions without having to predict the gas fee, while minimizing the volatility of transaction fees. But in the periods leading up to the gas price increase, we have seen a lot of transaction bursts on Klaytn with the following problems:
```

Author: ```suggestion
Klaytn has been following a policy of “fixed gas price“, with the gas price fixed at a certain level (e.g. 25 ston and 750 ston). This approach was adopted in the initial phase because it allows users to easily send transactions without having to predict the gas fee, while minimizing the volatility of transaction fees. But in the periods leading up to the gas price increase, we have seen a lot of transaction bursts on Klaytn with the following problems:
```

> * **Delay of transactions** : A large number of transactions were being generated at the same time, leading to increased process time for users. The fundamental cause to this was the sudden surge in transactions. But there were cases of thousands of transactions being fired to process certain transaction have been frequent. And the reason behind this repeated phenomenon was the absence of an algorithm that determines the priority of Klaytn transactions, as well as of an appropriate gas price policy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Delay of transaction execution** : A large number of transactions were being generated at the same time, leading to increased process time for users. The fundamental cause to this was the sudden surge in transactions. But there were cases of thousands of transactions being fired to process a certain transaction. And the reason behind this repeated phenomenon was the absence of an algorithm that prioritizes Klaytn transactions as well as of an appropriate gas price policy.
```

> * **Storage overload** : The aforementioned bot transactions are created mostly by bots, and are reverted transactions. These transactions strain the Klaytn storage in the long-term, which can hinder Klaytn from providing quick transaction finality and stable network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Storage overload** : The aforementioned bot transactions are created mostly by bots, and are mostly reverted and useless transactions. These transactions strain the Klaytn storage in the long-term, which can hinder Klaytn from providing quick transaction finality and stable network.
```

> * **Inefficient resource allocation due to difficulty in rational price determination** : Gas price should neither be too high or too low. A too low gas price increases vulnerability to DDOS attacks and and transaction delay for users. When it’s too high, the transaction cost is going to prevent users from using the network unreservedly. With the current fixed gas price policy, however, it is difficult to determine which price is appropriate, since the Klaytn network is constantly changing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Inefficient resource allocation due to difficulty in rational price determination** : Gas price should neither be too high or too low. A too low gas price increases vulnerability to DDOS attacks and transaction delay for users. When it’s too high, the transaction cost is going to prevent users from using the network unreservedly. With the current fixed gas price policy, however, it is difficult to determine which price is appropriate, since the congestion status of the Klaytn network is constantly changing.
```

> * **Inability to respond quickly and flexibly** : Gas price needs to go up during transaction spikes and go down when the network is stable. But under the current fixed gas price scheme, it takes a lot of time until an appropriate price range is discussed and actually implemented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Inability to respond quickly and flexibly** : Gas price needs to go up during transaction spikes and go down when the network is not congested. But under the current fixed gas price scheme, it is not easy to analyze and change the gas price based on the network congestion situation.
```

A burn mechanism is needed to be introduced on Klaytn while solving the above problems, in order to link the growth of the ecosystem with KLAY value.

> (This proposal only deals with dynamic fee policy, and a FIFO (First In First Out) transaction priority algorithm is already built at https://github.com/klaytn/klaytn)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(This proposal only deals with dynamic fee policy, and a FIFO (First In First Out) transaction priority algorithm is already implemented. See https://github.com/klaytn/klaytn/pull/1282 and https://github.com/klaytn/klaytn/pull/1309)
```

## Specification
This specification derived heavily from Ethereum's [ERC-1559](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-1559.md) written by Vitalik Buterin (@vbuterin), Eric Conner (@econoar), Rick Dudley (@AFDudley), Matthew Slipper (@mslipper), Ian Norden (@i-norden), Abdelhamid Bakhta (@abdelhamidbakhta).

> Transactions under a dynamic gas fee policy consist of `base_fee`, which are dynamically controlled according to the network congestion status. Network congestion is measured by `gas_used` which is the gas usage by blocks created on Klaytn. `base_fee` changes every block.

Reviewer: How the `base_fee` is included in the block? Do we use `gasPrice` field for this?

Author: @kjhman21 We already have a `baseFeePerGas` field for that. Refer to https://docs.klaytn.com/klaytn/design/computation/execution-model#block

> When a consensus node creates a block, if the `gas_used` of parent_block exceeds `gas_target`, `base_fee` would go up. On the other hand, if the `gas_used` is lower than `gas_target`, the `base_fee` would be reduced. This process would be repeated until the `base_fee` doesn’t exceed `lower_bound` or `upper_bound`. The block proposer would receive a part of the transaction feeds included in the block, and the rest would be burned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a consensus node creates a block, if the `gas_used` of the parent block exceeds `gas_target`, `base_fee` would go up. On the other hand, if the `gas_used` is lower than `gas_target`, the `base_fee` would be reduced. This process would be repeated until the `base_fee` doesn’t exceed `lower_bound` or `upper_bound`. The block proposer would receive a part of the fee of transactions included in the block, and the rest would be burned.
```

```python
from asyncio.windows_events import NULL
from typing import Union, Dict, Sequence, List, Tuple, Literal
from dataclasses import dataclass, field
from abc import ABC, abstractmethod

# Since Klaytn has multiple transaction types,
# only 3 transaction types are defined here for sake of simplicity.
@dataclass
class TxTypeLegacyTransaction:
	value: int = 0

>     to: int = 0

Reviewer: invalid indentation?

Author: Resolved.

>     to: int = 0

Author: ```suggestion
    value: int = 0
    to: int = 0
```

	committee: List[int] = field(default_factory=list)
	proposer: int = 0 
	size: int = 0 

@dataclass
class Account:
	type: int = 0
	nonce: int = 0
	humanReadable: bool = False 
	address: int = 0
	key: int = 0 
	balance: int = 0
	storage_root: int = 0
	code_hash: int = 0
	code_format: int = 0
	vm_version: int = 0

INITIAL_FORK_BLOCK_NUMBER = 107806544 # TBD
BASE_FEE_DELTA_REDUCING_DENOMINATOR = 64 # TBD
LOWER_BOUND_BASE_FEE = 2000000000 # TBD, 20ston
UPPER_BOUND_BASE_FEE = 2000000000000 # TBD, 2000ston
GAS_TARGET = 30000000 # TBD
BURN_RATIO = 0.5 # TBD

class World(ABC):
	def validate_block(self, block: Block) -> None:
		
		# check if the base fee is correct
		if INITIAL_FORK_BLOCK_NUMBER == block.number:
			expected_base_fee_per_gas = LOWER_BOUND_BASE_FEE

		else: 
			parent_base_fee_per_gas = self.parent(block).base_fee_per_gas
			parent_gas_used = self.parent(block).gas_used
			transactions = self.transactions(block)

			# check if the base fee is in the range
			if parent_base_fee_per_gas < LOWER_BOUND_BASE_FEE:
				expected_base_fee_per_gas = LOWER_BOUND_BASE_FEE

			elif parent_base_fee_per_gas > UPPER_BOUND_BASE_FEE:
				expected_base_fee_per_gas = UPPER_BOUND_BASE_FEE

> 

Reviewer: Don't we need to first calculate the expected_base_fee_per_gas?
then if the value is not in the range (lower, upper), we need to adjust the value.

Author: I think this work need to be done in line 216~227. Will update it.

Author: @kjhman21 logic updated.

			else: 
				# check if the base fee is correct
				if parent_gas_used == GAS_TARGET:
					expected_base_fee_per_gas = parent_base_fee_per_gas
				elif parent_gas_used > GAS_TARGET:
					gas_used_delta = parent_gas_used - GAS_TARGET

> 					base_fee_per_gas_delta = max(parent_base_fee_per_gas * gas_used_delta // GAS_TARGET // BASE_FEE_DELTA_REDUCING_DENOMINATOR, 1)

Reviewer: We need to define the operator `//` first.

Author: Added note on line 44

> 					expected_base_fee_per_gas = parent_base_fee_per_gas + base_fee_per_gas_delta

Author: ```suggestion
					expected_base_fee_per_gas = parent_base_fee_per_gas + base_fee_per_gas_delta
					
					if expected_base_fee_per_gas >  UPPER_BOUND_BASE_FEE:
					    expected_base_fee_per_gas = UPPER_BOUND_BASE_FEE
```

				else:
					gas_used_delta = GAS_TARGET - parent_gas_used

> 					base_fee_per_gas_delta = parent_base_fee_per_gas * gas_used_delta // GAS_TARGET // BASE_FEE_DELTA_REDUCING_DENOMINATOR

Reviewer: Don't we need to make a lower bound using max() like the above?

Author: ```suggestion
					base_fee_per_gas_delta = max(parent_base_fee_per_gas * gas_used_delta // GAS_TARGET // BASE_FEE_DELTA_REDUCING_DENOMINATOR, 1)
```

> 					expected_base_fee_per_gas = parent_base_fee_per_gas - base_fee_per_gas_delta

Author: ```suggestion
					expected_base_fee_per_gas = parent_base_fee_per_gas - base_fee_per_gas_delta
					
					if expected_base_fee_per_gas < LOWER_BOUND_BASE_FEE:
					   expected_base_fee_per_gas = LOWER_BOUND_BASE_FEE 
```

				fee_payer_address = None,
				fee_ratio = None
			)
		else:
			raise Exception('invalid transaction: unexpected number of items')

	@abstractmethod
	def parent(self, block: Block) -> Block: pass

	@abstractmethod
	def block_hash(self, block: Block) -> int: pass

	@abstractmethod
	def transactions(self, block: Block) -> Sequence[Transaction]: pass

	# effective_gas_price is the value returned by the GASPRICE (0x3a) opcode
	@abstractmethod
	def execute_transaction(self, transaction: NormalizedTransaction, effective_gas_price: int) -> int: pass

	@abstractmethod
	def validate_and_recover_signer_address(self, transaction: Transaction) -> int: pass

	@abstractmethod
	def account(self, address: int) -> Account: pass
```

## Expected Effect

The proposed dynamic gas price mechanism is expected to solve the following problems.
* Reduce transaction process delay and storage overcapacity
* Flexible gas price control depending on the network status
* Introduction of a burn mechanism

But it may give rise to the following changes:
* Edit gas price-related code of the ecosystem wallet and other tools
* Lower predictability of gas price

## Backwards Compatibility

> * This implementation will not break backward compatibility.

Reviewer: We need to say that this will break backward compatibility I think.
Because setting the gas price value should be changed.

> * But to use this feature, you must use another transaction type which will be implemented with this KIP.

Reviewer: This is not true. We will use the same transaction type, but the gas price value can vary.

## Specification
This specification derived heavily from Ethereum's [ERC-1559](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-1559.md) written by Vitalik Buterin (@vbuterin), Eric Conner (@econoar), Rick Dudley (@AFDudley), Matthew Slipper (@mslipper), Ian Norden (@i-norden), and Abdelhamid Bakhta (@abdelhamidbakhta).

Transactions under a dynamic gas fee policy consist of `base_fee_per_gas`, which are dynamically controlled according to the network congestion status. Network congestion is measured by `gas_used` which is the gas usage by blocks created on Klaytn. `base_fee_per_gas` changes every block.

When a consensus node creates a block, if the `gas_used` of the parent block exceeds `gas_target`, `base_fee_per_gas` would go up. On the other hand, if the `gas_used` is lower than `gas_target`, the `base_fee_per_gas` would be reduced. This process would be repeated until the `base_fee_per_gas` doesn’t exceed `lower_bound` or `upper_bound`. The block proposer would receive a part of the fee of transactions included in the block, and the rest would be burned.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The below shows pseudo code of this proposal.

```

				fee_ratio = None
			)
		else:
			raise Exception('invalid transaction: unexpected number of items')

	@abstractmethod
	def parent(self, block: Block) -> Block: pass

	@abstractmethod
	def block_hash(self, block: Block) -> int: pass

	@abstractmethod
	def transactions(self, block: Block) -> Sequence[Transaction]: pass

	# effective_gas_price is the value returned by the GASPRICE (0x3a) opcode
	@abstractmethod
	def execute_transaction(self, transaction: NormalizedTransaction, effective_gas_price: int) -> int: pass

	@abstractmethod
	def validate_and_recover_signer_address(self, transaction: Transaction) -> int: pass

	@abstractmethod
	def account(self, address: int) -> Account: pass
```

## Expected Effect

The proposed dynamic gas price mechanism is expected to solve the following problems.
* Reduce transaction process delay and storage overcapacity
* Flexible gas price control depending on the network status
* Introduction of a burn mechanism

But it may give rise to the following changes:
* Edit gas price-related code of the ecosystem wallet and other tools
* Lower predictability of gas price

## Backwards Compatibility

* All previous transaction types will remain the same.

> * Setting fixed gas price to send transactions will still work and be included in blocks, but those transactions will be not included in the block if a `base_fee` is higher than the gas price.

Author: ```suggestion
* Setting fixed gas price to send transactions will still work and be included in blocks, but those transactions will be not included in the block if a `base_fee_per_gas` is higher than the gas price.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: I suggest to replace `base_fee` to `base_fee_per_gas` to avoid confusion.
Furthermore I'd like to emphasize `base_fee_per_gas` in txPool and `gas_price` in tx.

Reviewer 2: Everything else LGTM.

Author: renamed it to `base_fee_per_gas`.

Klaytn has been following a policy of “fixed gas price“, with the gas price fixed at a certain level (e.g. 25 ston and 750 ston). This approach was adopted in the initial phase because it allows users to easily send transactions without having to predict the gas fee, while minimizing the volatility of transaction fees. But in the periods leading up to the gas price increase, we have seen a lot of transaction bursts on Klaytn with the following problems:

* **Delay of transaction execution** : A large number of transactions were being generated at the same time, leading to increased process time for users. The fundamental cause to this was the sudden surge in transactions. But there were cases of thousands of transactions being fired to process a certain transaction. And the reason behind this repeated phenomenon was the absence of an algorithm that prioritizes Klaytn transactions as well as of an appropriate gas price policy.

> * **Storage overload** : The aforementioned bot transactions are created mostly by bots, and are mostly reverted and useless transactions. These transactions strain the Klaytn storage in the long-term, which can hinder Klaytn from providing quick transaction finality and stable network.

Reviewer 3: `bot transactions were created by bot` is weird for me  
```suggestion
* **Storage overload** : The aforementioned a large number of transactions are created mostly by bots, and are mostly reverted and useless transactions. These transactions strain the Klaytn storage in the long-term, which can hinder Klaytn from providing quick transaction finality and stable network.
```

> * **Inefficient resource allocation due to difficulty in rational price determination** : Gas price should neither be too high or too low. A too low gas price increases vulnerability to DDOS attacks and transaction delay for users. When it’s too high, the transaction cost is going to prevent users from using the network unreservedly. With the current fixed gas price policy, however, it is difficult to determine which price is appropriate, since the congestion status of the Klaytn network is constantly changing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Inefficient resource allocation due to difficulty in rational price determination** : Gas price should neither be too high or too low. A too low gas price increases vulnerability to DoS (denial-of-service) attacks and transaction delay for users. When it’s too high, the transaction cost is going to prevent users from using the network unreservedly. With the current fixed gas price policy, however, it is difficult to determine which price is appropriate, since the congestion status of the Klaytn network is constantly changing.
```

* **Inability to respond quickly and flexibly** : Gas price needs to go up during transaction spikes and go down when the network is not congested. But under the current fixed gas price scheme, it is not easy to analyze and change the gas price based on the network congestion situation.

A burn mechanism is needed to be introduced on Klaytn while solving the above problems, in order to link the growth of the ecosystem with KLAY value.

(This proposal only deals with dynamic fee policy, and a FIFO (First In First Out) transaction priority algorithm is already implemented. See https://github.com/klaytn/klaytn/pull/1282 and https://github.com/klaytn/klaytn/pull/1309)

## Specification

> This specification derived heavily from Ethereum's [ERC-1559](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-1559.md) written by Vitalik Buterin (@vbuterin), Eric Conner (@econoar), Rick Dudley (@AFDudley), Matthew Slipper (@mslipper), Ian Norden (@i-norden), Abdelhamid Bakhta (@abdelhamidbakhta).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This specification derived heavily from Ethereum's [ERC-1559](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-1559.md) written by Vitalik Buterin (@vbuterin), Eric Conner (@econoar), Rick Dudley (@AFDudley), Matthew Slipper (@mslipper), Ian Norden (@i-norden), and Abdelhamid Bakhta (@abdelhamidbakhta).
```

> Transactions under a dynamic gas fee policy consist of `base_fee`, which are dynamically controlled according to the network congestion status. Network congestion is measured by `gas_used` which is the gas usage by blocks created on Klaytn. `base_fee` changes every block.

Reviewer: @lwj010 If you use `base_fee` like this, it means there is a field with that name, but it seems not true. use `baseFeePerGas` or just use base fee?

# RawTransaction : EthereumTxTypeEnvelope || EthereumTransactionType || TransactionPayload
# (|| is the byte/byte-array concatenation operator.)
# In this proposal, those concatenation is intentionally ommited for simplification.

# Transaction2930 in Ethereum. 
@dataclass
class TxTypeEthereumAccessList:
	type: int = 0x7801
	chain_id: int = 0
	nonce: int = 0
	gas_price: int = 0
	gas: int = 0
	to: int = 0
	value: int = 0
	data: bytes = bytes()
	access_list: List[Tuple[int, List[int]]] = field(default_factory=list)
	v: int = 0
	r: int = 0
	s: int = 0

# Transaction1559 in Ethereum.
@dataclass
class TxTypeEthereumDynamicFee:
	type: int = 0x7802
	chain_id: int = 0
	nonce: int = 0
	gas_tip_cap: int = 0
	gas_fee_cap: int = 0
	gas: int = 0
	to: int = 0
	value: int = 0
	data: bytes = bytes()
	access_list: List[Tuple[int, List[int]]] = field(default_factory=list)
	v: int = 0
	r: int = 0
	s: int = 0

EthereumTransactions = Union[TxTypeEthereumDynamicFee, TxTypeEthereumAccessList]

Transaction = Union[TxTypeLegacyTransaction, TxTypeFeeDelegatedSmartContractExecution, TxTypeFeeDelegatedSmartContractExecutionWithRatio, EthereumTransactions]

> # TODO: transaction accounting part

Author: ```suggestion

```

@dataclass
class NormalizedTransaction:
	signer_address: int = 0
	signer_nonce: int = 0
	max_fee_per_gas: int = 0
	gas_limit: int = 0
	to: int = 0
	value: int = 0
	data: bytes = bytes()
	fee_payer_address: int = 0
	fee_ratio: int = 1

@dataclass
class Block:
	hash: int = 0
	parent_hash: int = 0
	base_fee_per_gas: int = 0
	block_score: int = 0
	extra_data: bytes = bytes()
	gas_used: int = 0 
	governance_data: bytes = bytes()
	logs_bloom: int = 0
	number: int = 0
	transaction_receipt_root: int = 0
	reward: int = 0
	state_root: int = 0
	timestamp: int = 0
	timestamp_FoS: int = 0
	transaction_root: int = 0
	nonce: int = 0
	committee: List[int] = field(default_factory=list)
	proposer: int = 0 
	size: int = 0 

@dataclass
class Account:
	type: int = 0
	nonce: int = 0
	humanReadable: bool = False 
	address: int = 0
	key: int = 0 
	balance: int = 0
	storage_root: int = 0
	code_hash: int = 0
	code_format: int = 0
	vm_version: int = 0

INITIAL_FORK_BLOCK_NUMBER = 107806544 # TBD
BASE_FEE_DELTA_REDUCING_DENOMINATOR = 36 # Max basefee change: 5% per block 
LOWER_BOUND_BASE_FEE = 25000000000 # 25ston

> UPPER_BOUND_BASE_FEE = 750000000000 # 750ston

Reviewer: ```suggestion
UPPER_BOUND_BASE_FEE = 750000000000 # 750 ston
```

GAS_TARGET = 30000000 

> BLOCK_GAS_LIMIT = 84000000 # implicit block gas limit to enforce the max basefee change rate

Reviewer: It seems that others can mislead Klaytn have block gas limit in the future. I think we can choose any other name for this. `MAX_BLOCK_GAS_USED_FOR_BASE_FEE`?

Reviewer 2: I also think the name, `BLOCK_GAS_LIMIT` can be confusing in ethereum's one. We use it only for calculating `BASE_FEE`

> BURN_RATIO = 0.5 

Reviewer: We make sure distinguish which values are for governance parameters or not.

		transactions = self.transactions(block)
		parent_gas_used = self.parent(block).gas_used

		if parent_gas_used > BLOCK_GAS_LIMIT:
			parent_gas_used = BLOCK_GAS_LIMIT

		# check if the base fee is correct
		if INITIAL_FORK_BLOCK_NUMBER == block.number:
			expected_base_fee_per_gas = LOWER_BOUND_BASE_FEE

		elif parent_gas_used == GAS_TARGET:
			expected_base_fee_per_gas = parent_base_fee_per_gas

		elif parent_gas_used > GAS_TARGET:
			gas_used_delta = parent_gas_used - GAS_TARGET
			base_fee_per_gas_delta = max(parent_base_fee_per_gas * gas_used_delta // GAS_TARGET // BASE_FEE_DELTA_REDUCING_DENOMINATOR, 1)
			expected_base_fee_per_gas = parent_base_fee_per_gas + base_fee_per_gas_delta
			if expected_base_fee_per_gas > UPPER_BOUND_BASE_FEE:
				expected_base_fee_per_gas = UPPER_BOUND_BASE_FEE
			
		else:
			gas_used_delta = GAS_TARGET - parent_gas_used
			base_fee_per_gas_delta = parent_base_fee_per_gas * gas_used_delta // GAS_TARGET // BASE_FEE_DELTA_REDUCING_DENOMINATOR
			expected_base_fee_per_gas = parent_base_fee_per_gas - base_fee_per_gas_delta
			if expected_base_fee_per_gas < LOWER_BOUND_BASE_FEE:
				expected_base_fee_per_gas = LOWER_BOUND_BASE_FEE

> 		assert expected_base_fee_per_gas == block.base_fee_per_gas, 'invalid block: base fee not correct'

Reviewer: @lwj010 Why do we have this assert?

		# execute transactions and do gas accounting
		cumulative_transaction_gas_used = 0
		for unnormalized_transaction in transactions:
			# Note: this validates transaction signature and chain ID which must happen before we normalize below since normalized transactions don't include signature or chain ID
			signer_address = self.validate_and_recover_signer_address(unnormalized_transaction)
			transaction = self.normalize_transaction(unnormalized_transaction, signer_address)

			signer = self.account(signer_address)

			
			signer.balance -= transaction.amount

> 			assert signer.balance >= 0, 'invalid transaction: signer does not have enough ETH to cover attached value'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
			assert signer.balance >= 0, 'invalid transaction: signer does not have enough KLAY to cover attached value'
```

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> 			

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

			
			# TODO: fee delegation transaction accounting
			# the signer must be able to afford the transaction

> 			assert signer.balance >= transaction.gas_limit * transaction.max_fee_per_gas

Reviewer: ```suggestion
			assert fee_payer.balance >= transaction.gas_limit * transaction.max_fee_per_gas
```

we can replace signer to fee_payer so that we can include fee delegation transactions. i.e., we can think of a sender of non-fee-delegated transactions as a fee-payer.

> 			# TODO: fee delegation transaction accounting

Author: ```suggestion
			# fee delegation transaction accounting is needed 
```

			# ensure that the user was willing to at least pay the base fee
			assert transaction.max_fee_per_gas >= block.base_fee_per_gas

			# Prevent impossibly large numbers
			assert transaction.max_fee_per_gas < 2**256
			

> 			signer.balance -= transaction.gas_limit * block.base_fee_per_gas

Reviewer: ```suggestion
			fee_payer.balance -= transaction.gas_limit * block.base_fee_per_gas
```

> 			assert signer.balance >= 0, 'invalid transaction: signer does not have enough ETH to cover gas'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
			assert fee_payer.balance >= 0, 'invalid transaction: signer does not have enough KLAY to cover gas'
```

> 			

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

			gas_used = self.execute_transaction(transaction, block.base_fee_per_gas)
			gas_refund = transaction.gas_limit - gas_used
			cumulative_transaction_gas_used += gas_used
			# signer gets refunded for unused gas

> 			signer.balance += gas_refund * block.base_fee_per_gas

Reviewer: ```suggestion
			fee_payer.balance += gas_refund * block.base_fee_per_gas
```

> 			# signer gets refunded for unused gas

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

			# signer gets refunded for unused gas
```

			# CN and KGF, KIR account only receives some propotion of the base fee(basefee burned)
			self.account(block.proposer).balance += gas_used * block.base_fee_per_gas * BURN_RATIO * CN_DISTRIBUTION_RATIO
			self.account(kgf_address).balance += gas_used * block.base_fee_per_gas * BURN_RATIO * KGF_DISTRIBUTION_RATIO
			self.account(kir_address).balance += gas_used * block.base_fee_per_gas * BURN_RATIO * KIR_DISTRIBUTION_RATIO

		# check if the block spent too much gas transactions
		assert cumulative_transaction_gas_used == block.gas_used, 'invalid block: gas_used does not equal total gas used in all transactions'

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> 		# TODO: verify account balances match block's account balances (via state root comparison)

Reviewer: @lwj010 Does this TODO need to be resolved? or will you leave this as it is?

Author: @kjhman21 will leave this as it is, since now we're in implementation phase already.

Reviewer: @lwj010 Do you want us to update this? I think it is now ready to be merged, but it seems not good to have 'todo' here.
cc @kjeom

Author: @kjhman21 removed all todos from the file.

> 
> 		# TODO: verify account balances match block's account balances (via state root comparison)

Author: ```suggestion

```

		# TODO: validate the rest of the block

> 

Author: ```suggestion
		# validate the rest of the block

```

				fee_ratio = None
			)
		else:
			raise Exception('invalid transaction: unexpected number of items')

	@abstractmethod
	def parent(self, block: Block) -> Block: pass

	@abstractmethod
	def block_hash(self, block: Block) -> int: pass

	@abstractmethod
	def transactions(self, block: Block) -> Sequence[Transaction]: pass

	# effective_gas_price is the value returned by the GASPRICE (0x3a) opcode
	@abstractmethod
	def execute_transaction(self, transaction: NormalizedTransaction, effective_gas_price: int) -> int: pass

	@abstractmethod
	def validate_and_recover_signer_address(self, transaction: Transaction) -> int: pass

	@abstractmethod
	def account(self, address: int) -> Account: pass
```

## Expected Effect

The proposed dynamic gas price mechanism is expected to solve the following problems.
* Reduce transaction process delay and storage overcapacity
* Flexible gas price control depending on the network status
* Introduction of a burn mechanism

But it may give rise to the following changes:
* Edit gas price-related code of the ecosystem wallet and other tools
* Lower predictability of gas price

## Backwards Compatibility

* All previous transaction types will remain the same.

> * Setting fixed gas price to send transactions will still work and be included in blocks, but those transactions will be not included in the block if a `base_fee` is higher than the gas price.

Author: ```suggestion
* Setting fixed gas price to send transactions will still work and be included in blocks, but those transactions will be not included in the block if a `base_fee_per_gas` is higher than the gas price.
```

# TODO: transaction accounting part
@dataclass
class NormalizedTransaction:
	signer_address: int = 0
	signer_nonce: int = 0
	max_fee_per_gas: int = 0
	gas_limit: int = 0
	to: int = 0
	value: int = 0
	data: bytes = bytes()
	fee_payer_address: int = 0
	fee_ratio: int = 1

@dataclass
class Block:
	hash: int = 0
	parent_hash: int = 0
	base_fee_per_gas: int = 0
	block_score: int = 0
	extra_data: bytes = bytes()
	gas_used: int = 0 
	governance_data: bytes = bytes()
	logs_bloom: int = 0
	number: int = 0
	transaction_receipt_root: int = 0
	reward: int = 0
	state_root: int = 0
	timestamp: int = 0
	timestamp_FoS: int = 0
	transaction_root: int = 0
	nonce: int = 0
	committee: List[int] = field(default_factory=list)
	proposer: int = 0 
	size: int = 0 

@dataclass
class Account:
	type: int = 0
	nonce: int = 0
	humanReadable: bool = False 
	address: int = 0
	key: int = 0 
	balance: int = 0
	storage_root: int = 0
	code_hash: int = 0
	code_format: int = 0
	vm_version: int = 0

INITIAL_FORK_BLOCK_NUMBER = 107806544 # TBD
BASE_FEE_DELTA_REDUCING_DENOMINATOR = 36 # Max basefee change: 5% per block 

> LOWER_BOUND_BASE_FEE = 2500000000 # 25ston

Reviewer 2: I think you set the LOWER_BOUND_BASE_FEE to 2.5ston

Author: Thanks for your feedback.

```suggestion
LOWER_BOUND_BASE_FEE = 25000000000 # 25ston
```

UPPER_BOUND_BASE_FEE = 750000000000 # 750ston
GAS_TARGET = 30000000 
BLOCK_GAS_LIMIT = 84000000 # implicit block gas limit to enforce the max basefee change rate
BURN_RATIO = 0.5 
CN_DISTRIBUTION_RATIO = 0.34 # set by governance
KGF_DISTRIBUTION_RATIO = 0.54 # set by governance
KIR_DISTRIBUTION_RATIO = 0.12 # set by governance

class World(ABC):
	def validate_block(self, block: Block) -> None:

		parent_base_fee_per_gas = self.parent(block).base_fee_per_gas
		transactions = self.transactions(block)

> 		if parent_gas_used > BLOCK_GAS_LIMIT:

Reviewer: Where is this value `parent_gas_used` first assigned? I cannot find the location.

Author: Updated.
